---
layout: post
title: nREPL 0.6
date: 2019-03-29 14:30 +0200
categories: posts
tags:
- Clojure
- nREPL
---

[nREPL](https://nrepl.org) 0.6 was released almost two months ago, but
it never got the attention it deserved. At the time of the release I
was enjoying some time off from development, and when I
got back home I was swamped with work.  Still, I had a created todo item to
write a blog post detailing the important improvements in nREPL 0.6
and I'm finally doing this.

<!--more-->

## New Print Middleware

The most important user-visible change in this release is the
replacement of the `pr-values` middleware with a new `print`
middleware. `pr-values`, as it name implies, was the middleware that
printed evaluation result values to strings, so they could be returned
to the clients in an easy to consume manner.[^1] It was around since
the early days of nREPL, and while it generally got the job done, it
was also problematic as it had hardcoded the print function it was
using and because it forced the value to be fully printed it could
kill the server (by eating all its memory) or kill your client (most
editors struggle with huge chunks of texts) if you happened to
evaluate something huge by accident. We tried to fix the first problem
in nREPL 0.5 by tweaking `pr-values`, but later Brandon Bloom [pointed
out some problems with the approach we had chosen at the
time](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/issues/117).

The new `print` middleware that succeeded `pr-values` solves all of those problems and
more. This middleware is intended to provide generic printing
functionality to other middlewares. By default its behaviour is
entirely backwards-compatible with `pr-values`. Rather than being
coupled to the specific key `:value`, the new middleware allows other
ops to provide `:nrepl.middleware.print/keys` in responses.

Here's a summary of the new middleware's options are summarised below:

* `:nrepl.middleware.print/var` – (namespaced) name of var to use as printing function
* `:nrepl.middleware.print/options` – map of options to pass to printing function
* `:nrepl.middleware.print/stream?` – whether or not to stream the result of printing each value over one or more messages
* `:nrepl.middleware.print/buffer-size` – size of the buffer to use when streaming results; represents an upper bound on response size in bytes
* `:nrepl.middleware.print/quota` – hard limit of number of bytes to print before truncating

**Note:** The options are namespaced for two reasons - to avoid conflicts with older middlewares and to highlight the fact that printing
is Clojure-specific and not part of the language-agnostic [nREPL protocol]({% post_url 2019-01-12-nrepl-beyond-clojure %}).

An example of non-streamed vs. streamed printing:

```clojure
;; request
-> {:op :eval
    :code "(range 512)"}

;; responses
<- {:ns "user" :value "(0 1 2 3 ... 510 511)"}
<- {:status ["done"]}
```

```clojure
-> {:op :eval
    :code "(range 512)"
    :nrepl.middleware.print/stream? 1}

<- {:value "(0 1 2 3 ... 282 2"}
<- {:value "83 284 ... 510 511)"}
<- {:ns "user"}
<- {:status ["done"]}
```

Clients have the choice of rendering each part of the result as they
arrive, or using some buffering strategy (perhaps to prevent the
output from being intermingled with that of `*out*` / `*err*`).

An example of truncation with streaming enabled:

```clojure
-> {:op :eval
    :code "(range 512)"
    :nrepl.middleware.print/stream? 1
    :nrepl.middleware.print/quota 8}

<- {:value "(0 1 2 3"}
<- {:status ["nrepl.middleware.print/truncated"]}
<- {:ns "user"}
<- {:status ["done"]}
```

and without streaming enabled:

```clojure
-> {:op :eval
    :code "(range 512)"
    :nrepl.middleware.print/quota 8}

<- {:ns "user"
    :value "(0 1 2 3"
    :status "nrepl.middleware.print/truncated"
    :nrepl.middleware.print/truncated-keys ["value"]}
<- {:status ["done"]}
```

The [implementation details](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/pull/118)
behind this are quite interesting, but I'll omit them here. I'll only
summarize the highlights:

* Big results start appearing much faster than before (provided you enable streaming).
* You can interrupt the printing of a big result (provided you enable streaming).
* You can set a hard limit for the size of a result.

More information about the new middleware is available in the [user
manual](https://nrepl.org/nrepl/0.6.0/design/middleware.html#_pretty_printing).

Special thanks to Michael Griffiths for tackling this and to Brandon
Bloom, who pointed out the deficiencies in the approach we had taken
in nREPL 0.5!

## New Caught Middleware

nREPL 0.6 includes a `caught` middleware which provides a configurable hook for any
`java.lang.Throwable` that should be conveyed interactively (generally by
printing to `\*err*`). Like the `print` middleware, any options may be provided
in either requests or responses (the former taking precedence over the latter if
any options are specified in both). The following options are supported:

* `:nrepl.middleware.caught/caught`: a fully-qualified symbol naming a var whose
  function to use to convey interactive errors. Must point to a function that
  takes a `java.lang.Throwable` as its sole argument. Defaults to
  `clojure.main/repl-caught`.

* `:nrepl.middleware.caught/print?`: if logical true, the printed value of any
  interactive errors will be returned in the response (otherwise they will be
  elided). Delegates to `nrepl.middleware.print` to perform the printing.
  Defaults to false.

``` clojure
{:op :eval
 :code "(/ 1 0)"
 :nrepl.middleware.caught/caught 'my.custom/print-stacktrace
 :nrepl.middleware.caught/print? true}
```

**Note:** Just like that `print` middleware, the `caught` middleware is also Clojure-specific
and not considered part of nREPL's generic protocol.

The functionality of the `caught` middleware is reusable by other middlewares.
If a middleware descriptor's `:requires` set contains
`#'nrepl.middleware.caught/wrap-caught`, then it can expect:

* Any returned responses containing the key `:nrepl.middleware.caught/throwable`
  will have that key's corresponding value passed to the hook.

* Any handled requests will contain the key
  `:nrepl.middleware.caught/caught-fn`, whose value is a function that can be
  called on a `java.lang.Throwable` to convey errors interactively.

That middleware is another fine piece of work by the awesome Michael Griffiths.

## Single evaluation thread per session

Previously nREPL's evaluation mechanism was based on a homemade agents
implementation, which worked well, but would change the evaluation
thread used by the REPL unexpectedly. We've simplified the evaluation
logic by simply associating a permanent evaluation thread to each
nREPL session. The thread never changes now unless you interrupt an
evaluation in progress, which kills the thread and spawns a new
one. The new implementation is much simpler and its behaviour is
completely predictable. See the discussion
[here](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/issues/16) for more details.

Technically this change is _breaking_, as it touched a few public
vars, but in practice it seemed that `cider-nrepl` was the only
project making use of them, so no one really noticed any of this.

Special thanks to Christophe Grand for working on this!

## Stop Evaluation After the First Read Error

Check out this:

``` clojure
user=> (comment {:a} (println "BOOM!"))
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:1:14).
Map literal must contain an even number of forms
BOOM!
nil
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:1:33).
Unmatched delimiter: )
```

Or this:

``` clojure
user=> (defn foo [] (println {:a}) (println "BOOM!"))
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:8:27).
Map literal must contain an even number of forms
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:8:28).
Unmatched delimiter: )
BOOM!
nil
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:8:47).
Unmatched delimiter: )
```

That's pretty weird, right?

Observe how because of a syntactic error (odd number of elements in a
map) the `println` form gets executed, even though it shouldn't (since
it's in `comment` and `defn` form respectively).

Besides this potentially dangerous but rare behavior, there is also an
much more common inconvenience when you have to debug such
errors. What should be the result of evaluating a single form triggers
multiple exceptions, all but one of which don't make any sense. They
obscure the original problem and make life harder, especially to the
beginners. The only thing to do is
to remember that `Unmatched delimiter: )` means you probably have an
odd-arg map somewhere.

That was the behavior in the standard Clojure REPL and nREPL until now. Starting with nREPL 0.6 you'd get only:

``` clojure
user=> (comment {:a} (println "BOOM!"))
Syntax error reading source at (REPL:1:14).
Map literal must contain an even number of forms
BOOM!
```

Notice the lack of the "fake" result and the second read error.

All the credit here goes to Alex Yakushev who implemented this improvement!

## Grab Bag

As with every release there were also other small bug fixes and improvements here and there.
I think there are two worth sharing here:

* nREPL has 0 runtime dependencies (again). I've reconsidered the decision to extract `nrepl.bencode` into a separate library and brought it back to nREPL itself.
The separate library will continue to exist and will be kept in sync with the `nrepl.bencode` namespace in nREPL.
* We've exposed a public CLI API in the `nrepl.cmdline` namespace. The API is experimental and subject to changes, but I think some people might find it useful.

Check out [the release
notes](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/releases/tag/0.6.0) for a
complete list of changes in nREPL 0.6.

nREPL's [user manual](https://nrepl.org) was fully updated to reflect the changes in the latest version.

## (next nREPL)

The plan for the next nREPL release is fairly simple:

* Provide a native EDN transport, as an alternative to the default bencode transport.[^2]
* Provide an injection mechanism for clients, so they can supply nREPL with resources and classes directly. See [this ticket](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/pull/109) for details.

I'd love for us to also make some headway with respect to being able
to [upgrade a plain socket REPL to
nREPL](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/issues/96) and with [porting
unrepl's rich data printer](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/pull/106).

Once those features are completed I think we'd be ready for long-awaited 1.0 release. More importantly - nREPL will reach an amazing level of flexibility and would
serve you even better!

## Epilogue

By the time I got to write this post nREPL 0.6 is already widely
available, as it quickly made it's way to Leiningen 2.9. It's also
merged in Boot's master, but there's no stable Boot release shipping
nREPL 0.6 yet. I'm also quite pleased to report that 2 months after
the release we got 0 reported bugs/regressions from the previous
version.  Good work, everyone!

CIDER users can already take full advantage of all the improvements if they upgrade to CIDER 0.21 (New York).
I hope the other clients will quickly follow in its steps (if they haven't done so already).

nREPL 0.6 is a massive step forward for nREPL and I couldn't be more
proud of it. That's certainly the most important release we've had
since the project left Clojure Contrib. I've had very few direct
contributions to nREPL 0.6 (other than acting as project coordinator)
and I'd like to thank once again all the great people who contributed
their time and knowledge! Extra special thanks to Christophe Grand and
Michael Griffiths. You rock! We wouldn't have made it so far without
you!  This release is truly a testament to the power of open-source
that's all about you!

That's all from me for now. I hope this long overdue post was useful to you. Keep hacking!

[^1]: Not to mention that you can't really map EDN to bencode, which means that the only way in which you can return an EDN value is in a printed form.
[^2]: That's already done.
