---
layout: post
title: Meta Advent 2019
date: 2019-12-01 17:20 +0200
categories: posts
tags:
- Meta
- Meta Advent 2019
- Series
---

Recently [Arne Brasseur](https://github.com/plexus) shared a pretty cool idea over at [Lambda
Island](https://lambdaisland.com/blog/2019-11-25-advent-of-parens) - namely to
do a blogging alternative to the popular ["Advent of Code"](https://adventofcode.com/) this holiday season.
Arne challenged himself to write a blog post every day from the 1st of December to
the 24th of December and dubbed this challenge "Advent of Parens 2019".

I loved the idea, as I desperately needed some motivation to write more. This year I've often
been pondering about the impact that goals are having on our lives and productivity. I even wrote
a little bit on the subject in a [previous post]({% post_url 2019-10-21-meta-redux-year-one %}).
Today I pledge my intention to take part in Arne's challenge!
This short post serves two purposes - it's my declaration of participation and it's also
my first entry in the "Meta Advent 2019".[^1]

I haven't thought much about the topics I'll be tackling over the next four
weeks, but knowing me there will be a healthy amount of Emacs, Clojure and Ruby
articles in the mix. Unlike Arne, I don't have any articles that I've already
written and are ready for publishing, but I've got a huge backlog of ideas and I
love to improvise. One topic is clear - I still have to write a summary of the
results of ["The State of CIDER 2019"]({% post_url 2019-11-02-state-of-cider %})
survey.

I was wondering whether I want to do a double challenge and target a blog post per day on
both "Meta Redux" and ["Emacs Redux"](https://metaredux.com), but I've decided I shouldn't be overly ambitious with V1.
Maybe next year... I'm still wondering whether it'd be cheating if I spread those 24 blog posts over the two blogs.
I guess I'll figure this out as we go.

I'd love to see more people joining our little blogging advent. I think this will be a lot of fun!
That's all from me for now. See you tomorrow!

[^1]: I know it feels like cheating, but I'm one lazy scoundrel.
