---
layout: post
title: nREPL 1.0
date: 2022-08-25 09:40 +0300
tags:
- Clojure
- nREPL
---

Yesterday I released [nREPL
1.0](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/releases/tag/1.0.0).  I hadn't really
planned to have the release then, but after cutting [CIDER 1.5
("Strasbourg")](https://github.com/clojure-emacs/cider/releases/tag/v1.5.0) a bit earlier that day, I
decided that this was The Day.

nREPL 1.0 is a tiny release in terms of changes and that's OK. It means we've
gotten to the point where most of the problems that we've set out to address in
2018 have been solved.[^1]  Some highlights:

- many annoying bugs have been solved
- the internal architecture has been (massively) improved
- the protocol has been extended with some essential functionality like code lookup, code
completion and dynamic code/middleware loading
- while [the documentation](https://nrepl.org) is still not
great, it's much better than it was 4 years ago
- we've implemented an EDN transport for the people who don't like bencode
- we've added native support for Unix sockets
- most prominent nREPL extensions are now part of the [nREPL GitHub organization](https://github.com/nrepl)

The only thing that was missing at this point was the magic "1.0" release to
acknowledge all of this.

This was quite the journey and I'm happy that we've made it to this massive milestone. If I knew how much work I'd need
to put in to make nREPL 1.0 a reality back in 2018, I'd probably wouldn't have volunteered for this task. But I'm very glad that I did!
Working on nREPL was much trickier than working on CIDER in many ways and taught me a lot about patience[^2] and the
value of maintaining backward compatibility. Outside of the initial namespace changes we didn't break backward compatibility at all!
Following in the footsteps of my one of my [Clojure Heroes]({% post_url 2019-06-10-clojure-heroes %}) (Chas) wasn't easy either,
as I had quite the shoes to fill!

I'm really glad that mine & Chas's theory that moving nREPL out of Clojure
Contrib would result in more contributions turned out to be correct. We got
where we did through the work of *many* people and I am thankful to all of them!
And recently we've celebrated the 12th million download of nREPL after it's
development was restarted and I became the project's maintainer.  I hope this
means we're doing something right.

Still, our work is never truly done. Now that 1.0 is out of the way we have to
start thinking about what follows next. Recently there were a couple of
interesting discussions about [missing
features](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/discussions/275) and [improving the
nREPL protocol specification and the ability to test against
it](https://github.com/nrepl/nrepl/discussions/273). I fully agree that this is
where our focus should be going forward. In particular - I think it's super
important to improve the documentation of the specification, so people wouldn't
have to look at the server/client message exchange to figure out how the nREPL
protocol works. I'm reasonably sure this will also result in broader adoption of
nREPL outside the Clojure community.

I hope that more people will join those interesting conversations and will be
willing to help with the work they are going to generate. As usual -
contributions are most welcome! Together we brought back nREPL to life and
together we can make it even better. I consider the past 4 years to be another great
display of the awesomeness of the Clojure community. Keep hacking!

[^1]: Actually we had addressed quite a few problems in 2018 alone. See [this article]({% post_url 2018-10-29-nrepl-redux %}) for more details.
[^2]: It took a couple of years until most Clojure dev tools moved away fully from the legacy `tools.nrepl` and embraced the new `nrepl/nrepl`.
