---
layout: post
title: State of CIDER Survey (2024)
date: 2024-12-23 14:48 +0200
tags:
- CIDER
- Emacs
- Clojure
- Survey
---

**TL;DR** You'll find the survey [here](https://forms.gle/H24Z1Yk79mGAnAHn8).

It's been a while since the first and only "State of CIDER" survey.[^1] Right
after it happened in the end of 2019, the world went to shit and I kind of
forgot about my intent to do the survey annually.  5 years later, it's high
time we get back on track!

CIDER has changed a lot in the past 5 years. nREPL has changed a lot. The development tooling Clojure
ecosystem has changed a lot. Even Emacs has changed a lot. I'm guessing your usage of CIDER has changed a lot as well. If you're still
using Clojure and CIDER today, that is...

You can find the new survey [here](https://forms.gle/H24Z1Yk79mGAnAHn8).
We've made several updates to the questions - most notably there's now a question about how frequently are you using certain CIDER features.

I've been thinking a lot lately that perhaps we went overboard with the feature-set in CIDER and that it might be prudent to trim the fat
in CIDER 2.0, but we need data, so we can accurately know what's being used and what's not. I've also been thinking that mentioning many of
the less known features in the survey might provoke some people to try them out. We'll see.

There are other important questions that I like to get answers for, e.g.:

- Can we drop support for Emacs 26 (and maybe even Emacs 27)?
- Can we drop support for Java 8?[^2]
- Do people think that CIDER improved in the last year?
- How often are people upgrading their CIDER installation?
- What problems are users encountering? What would they like to see added/changed/improved?
- Are people willing to support the project in one way or another?[^3]
- Is Figwheel still a thing in ClojureScript?

Your responses will also be instrumental in shaping up the roadmap for CIDER 2.0.

Last time around we got 545 responses and I hope this time around we'll do a bit
better, as more responses mean that the data we got is more accurate. The new
survey is off to a pretty slow start - less than 200 responses in the first
week. It will likely stay open till the end of January, so I hope we are going
to get 500+ responses in total this around time as well.

Thanks for taking the time to fill in the survey! This means a lot to me and our
team! I'd really appreciate it if you shared the survey on your social media
profiles, so more people see it and take part in it. Let's make CIDER better together!

That's all I have for you today. Keep hacking!

[^1]: <https://metaredux.com/posts/2019/11/02/state-of-cider.html>
[^2]: Who am I kidding here... I'm well aware we'll be stuck supporting it for all eternity...
[^3]: The financial support the project has received eroded quite a lot in the last couple of years, which was somewhat disappointing given all the work that went into CIDER and its ecosystem.
